Meeting/Event: Dominican Republic - General Debate, 81st Session
Date: 23 September 2026
Categories: Meetings & Events > General Assembly > 81st Session > Plenary meetings

[Auto-generated transcript: may contain errors]

The assembly will now hear an address by His Excellency Luis Rodolfo Abinader Corona, President of the Dominican Republic.
I request protocol to please escort His Excellency and invite him to address the assembly.
Excellency Khalilur Rahman, President of the 81st Session of the United Nations General Assembly; Your Excellency Mr. António Guterres, United Nations Secretary-General; heads of state and government; distinguished heads of delegation; ladies and gentlemen.
At the outset, on behalf of the Dominican people, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, upon your election, and express to Secretary-General Guterres in his last GA session at the helm of this organization our gratitude to him for his commitment to peace.

You have brought us together to restore trust and manage transformation.
To achieve this, we now require serenity, clarity, and unity— serenity because the international order is going through a profound transition, clarity because this organization faces an unprecedented financial situation and conflicts that are ongoing, and a technological revolution that is progressing quicker than our ability to govern it, and unity because none of these challenges can be addressed by one country acting alone.
As a developing island country, the Dominican Republic is well aware of vulnerability.
Situations that happen far away from our coasts can directly impact the dinner tables of our families.

The wars in Europe and the Middle East have caused the prices of food and energy to skyrocket.
My country imports all of the fuel that it consumes.
We are not the ones that set the prices; however, the prices impact us without us being able to control them.
And this is why we advocate de-escalation, freedom of navigation, and for a diplomatic solution that prevents nuclear proliferation in the region.

Mr. President, for countries like ours, a rules-based order is a condition for our security and a guarantee that it is the norms agreed on by everyone and not force that resolve disputes between nations.
It's for this reason that it's necessary to restore trust in this organization, and three things are necessary in this regard to achieve it: renewing representation, renewing peacekeeping operations, and renewing support for developing countries.
We support the UNAIT initiative with a sense of conviction.
However, there is no reform that can be successful without resources behind it, and that's why the Dominican Republic is complying and playing our role.

This year, we were one of the first countries to fully pay our contribution to the regular budget.
Renewing representation requires a security council that looks more like the multipolar world of the present, and it also requires thinking about who will lead this organization next.
This year, I affirmed, from this very same rostrum, that it was the turn of Latin America and the Caribbean to provide renewed leadership, and that the time had come for a woman to be Secretary-General of this organization.
The candidates that are running confirm this.

In more than 80 years, no woman has led this organization.
We trust that the Security Council and the General Assembly will rise to this moment.
Ladies and gentlemen, renewing peacekeeping operations, without a shadow of a doubt, is our most urgent task.
Today, transnational criminal networks control territories, they traffic arms and people, and they recruit children.

Haiti, our neighbor, is the clearest example of this.
Since 2021, the Dominican Republic has warned in each and every forum that this crisis is a threat to the peace and security of the region, and particularly for my country.
A year ago, from this same rostrum, I called upon the council to act without delay.
Six days later, the council adopted Resolution 2793 that authorized a banned suppression force with a strong mandate and with the support of a United Nations support office.

I thank the United States and Panama for their leadership, as well as Canada and other donors for their support, Kenya for their commitment, and the commitment of all of the countries who today have their men and women serving in Haiti.
However, the reality does not allow us to wait.
One month ago, in the Haitian community of Kentscoff, in just one night, gangs murdered no less than 47 people, including 5 children.
Close to a million and a half of Haitians have been displaced from their homes.

Half of them are children.
This assembly cannot resign to seeing massacres become the norm for the long-suffering Haitian people.
What the council approved now requires the means to implement it.
First, the deployment of the force that today is only funded up to a fifth of and only has up to a fifth, rather, of the troops authorized.

Second, fulfilling the arms embargo and sanctioning those who are financing and protecting gangs.
And thirdly, strengthening the police, the armed forces, and the Haitian justice system so that the security can be sustained.
The mandate of the force expires on the 30th of September.
It's for the council now to renew it and for the international community to contribute troops and the resources that are required.

Renewing it without completing it would be prolonging a promise that's not fulfilled.
None of this requires a new decision.
The Dominican Republic has played its role.
We will not practice a diplomacy of mere declarations, but rather a diplomacy of solutions.

We will contribute to building the consensus that made a resolution possible, and we are committing our financial contributions that's proportional for the trust fund of the force and facilitating from our country transit, logistics, and a UN support office.
We are cooperating with the sanctions regime and supporting the personnel of the mission in our hospitals.
We are doing this because this is, above all, a question of national security for our country, and we must repeat this as clearly as possible: there is no Dominican solution to the Haitian crisis, and no state or organization can impose on our country to do it in their place.
We will continue to protect our borders, to implement our migratory laws, and strengthen and equip our armed forces in exercise of sovereign equality that the United Nations recognizes for each state, and all of this fully respecting the international obligations that we freely assumed.

The solution to Haiti lies in Haiti itself, and the obligation of the international community is to make it possible there, in their country, for children to be able to go back to school and for Haitian youth to be able to have a future in their own country, and as soon as the conditions allow it, for the Haitians to be able to vote for the first time in a decade.
Mr. President, the Dominican Republic has worked to fulfill the essential commitments for our people, and we have been able to show results.
We've reduced monetary poverty by 25.8% from 25.8% in 2019 to 14.6% in the first 6 months of this year.
And just two months ago, the FAO confirmed that my country was taken off the hunger map, being the fifth country in Latin America to achieve this.

We have committed to achieving the zero hunger goal by 2028, but we managed to achieve this before that.
For 4 consecutive years, we've received more than $4 billion per year in foreign direct investment, and in 2025, for the first time, more than $5 billion.
And we are forecasting to receive more this year.
Our exports reached a record of close to $16 billion.

These results are a reflection of our legal certainty, institutional stability, and trust, inspired by the trust that different actors have in the Dominican Republic.
Peace, investment in new infrastructure, as well as the hospitality of our people, have led us to receive 7.5 million visitors in 2019, and this year is projected to exceed 12 million, and this figure is only rivaled by Mexico in Latin America.
However, a country's progress shouldn't— progress in a country should not mean that a country is penalized.
Middle-income countries host 3 in every 4 people on the planet and 2 in every 3 people in extreme poverty, and nevertheless, GDP continues to be used exclusively for concessional financing.

So we're calling for a process like the one that was initiated in the Pact for the Future, to achieve a common framework to measure progress beyond GDP, and for international financial institutions to incorporate these criteria in the multidimensional vulnerability index.
Because what can't be measured and what isn't measured doesn't influence decisions, and what doesn't influence decisions does not receive attention.
For a small island country, climate change is not an abstract matter, ladies and gentlemen.
Our vulnerability is not a statistical category; it's the reality that we're experiencing, and that's why we welcome that this assembly has committed to adopting a declaration on sea level rise guaranteeing stability in maritime areas.

The declaration also includes sargassum, which is a scourge that afflicts the Caribbean coast every year, affecting tourism.
Following an initiative by the Dominican Republic, the UN General Assembly and the Assembly for the Environment have adopted the first global resolution on sargassum, which, as a regional problem, recognizes a global challenge.
We will not tire in calling for climate change to be delivered as quickly as storms strike the Caribbean.
In this vein, we have moved to ratify the BBNJ agreement on biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction, and in March, we laid down our ratification instrument.

The ocean is an important source of life and is our most extensive border, and that's why protecting it is a state obligation.
President, serenity, clarity, and unity.
With these concepts, we should be able to build a more representative United Nations that are more efficient and able to fulfill the demands of the people that we serve.
For the whole of humanity who are watching us, it will not be enough to just adopt resolutions.

Rather, the resolutions that matter will be the ones that we duly implement.
Ladies and gentlemen, the urgency before us is imposed by the nature of these new times.
The future is no longer a distant prospect; we are living it alongside the present.
As changes in the conditions of human existence occur with such speed that we no longer need to wait decades before they become part of history, many of our peoples run the risk of living through this era without benefiting from the great advances humanity is achieving.

Let us act now and work together for the well-being of our peoples.
Thank you very much, and may God protect all of us.
On behalf of the Assembly, I thank the President of the Dominican Republic.